# Lecture 2 (3/10) Jean-Marc.Vincent

*The notes are taken in a chronological fashion in a ramble-on fashion. Singular words and activities indicate that we (discussed, learned, performed) the aforementioned.*
___
### Describe science to your 12 y.o brother/sister:
"Science is testing what happens when we do something, in order to understand how the world works."
 
Science is composed of:
- Aim 
  - Explanations
  - Global
- Methods 
  - Experiments
- Knowledge
  - Cumulative
- Formalisation

Conclusions from 'science' definition exercise that we must be mindful of:
- We all have different definitions of science
- Science is shared through a common (limited) language (english)

An exquisite cadaver exercise.

Different "official" definitions of science. French vs Anglo-saxon definitions. These boil down to:
Structured knowledge on the "physical world" associated to universal methods (observation/experiment)
- But what about in computer science? Are computers really a part of the "physical world"?
- Or in mathematics? There we have abstract representations of the physical world. 

Computing:
- A science of artifical (but not only) world
- A technology (hardware, software, network)
- Applications
- Social Impact

## Computer science constituents
### Concepts
- Informations
  - Representation, communication, compression
- Algorithm
  - Operative process (can be studied)
- Programming Language
  - link between levels of abstraction
- Architecture (Computing Engine)
  - Abstraction of the physical world (questionable)

### Methods
- Back and forth between theory and experimentation
- Automatic abstraction transform
- Self-generated tools
  - When doing phyiscs, you are building tools with other things. Whereas in CS, you are writing a program (part of CS!) to "measure" the result. 

### Human organization

---
A priori knowledge is independent from any experience (e.g mathematics) whereas a posteriori knowledge depends on empirical evidence (e.g physics).

Claude Bernard (1813-1878) formulated **The Scientific Method** in 3 steps (in a loop) :
1. Observation of the reality is possible (without prejudice)
2. Formulation of a hypothesis (thoery) from scientist creativity
3. Experimental verification by confrontation of the hypothesis with the reality (which is always true).

This is based on *inductivism* where we reason from particular case(s) (observations) to the general situation.

Then Karl Popper (1902 - 1994) came a long and posed his criteria to separate science and non-science: A scientific theory should be **falsifiable** e.g possbile to disprove with empirical evidence.  
"One can sum up all this by saying that the criterion of the scientific status of a thory is its falsifiability, or refutability, or testability." - K.R.Popper

---

## Science: A Social Object
### Individual reserachers
- Individual basic work 
- Point-to-point collaboration
### Research teams and Labs
- Small groups of researchers with a common goal
- Support (shared resources)
- Social management
### International Community
- International groups 
- Publications
- Conferences
### Institutionality of Research
- Science management (Local Universities, National Government)
- Structures of Research
- International groups (Europe, bilateral agreements)
---
# Science checklist
## How scientific is it?
- Focuses on the *natural* world
- Aims to explore the natural world
- Uses testable ideas
- Reliens on evidence
- Involves the scientific community
- Leads to ongoing research (maybe closes one door but opens many other, e.g 10 questions by David Hilbert)

---
# What a nice picture!
### What is a good picture (figure)? See homework
- Readability for the reader
- Intelligibility of the message to the reader
- No possible misunderstanding











---
# Testing
I can make a bullet list like this:
- Object 1
- Object 2
- Object 3

I can make a table like this

| Header 1                        | Header 2                 |                 | Header 4        |
|---------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|
| This is a text box in the table | This is another text box | More text boxes | More text boxes |

