# Lecture 7 (21/11 2024) 

*Summarized learnings from last lecture (which I didn't attend): descriptive vs. inferential statistics, loss function, 
$R^{2}$ value to measure the appropriateness of an inferential model.*

A linear model fit gives you:

* Estimate: the proposed value of the parameter
* Std. Error: $\sigma/\sqrt{n}$
* t value: Probability that the parameter = 0 
* p-value of the entire model: probability that the whole model = 0

Adjusted R square: accounts for how many variables you have in the model - more variables mean smaller R-squared
(but too many could give R2 = 1 no problem) so this value takes that into account.

Homoscedastic, heteroscedastic, quadratic data sets\
There is an interplay between the intercept and slope parameters. They will not both be "small" or "large" 
at the same time.

## Extensions Linear Model

### Discrete Variables: ANOVA
Type1 errors: "seeing something that doesn't exist" (a relationship, trend, etc...) This is combatted using 
analysis of variance.

ANOVA
* Enables to prove that some parameters have little influence 
* Decomposes the variance to allow for deep analysis (see slides)

RCMDR (GUI for all the statistical tools in R, organized in menus) can be very useful!

## Challenger exercise
Should be done with logistic regression\
Xaxis: pressure and temperature\
Yaxis: P(failure)

We want a continuous evaluation (model), **not** linear model. Logistic regression can do predictions. Do this on challenger:

Points:
1. Shouldn't remove the non-problematic flights. 
2. Apply logistic regression to the data.
3. Draw conclusion

## Linear model vs. Generalized linear model

Ax = b \
least squares: $\hat{x} = (A^{t}A)^{-1}A^{T}b$


## Conclusions

* You need a model to perform your regression (model selection!)
* You need to check whether the underlying hypothesis of this model are reasonable or not (the prerequisites)

The model will allow you to:
* Asses and quantify effect of parameters
* Extrapolate and "predict" behavior within the range of parameters
* Detect outstanding points (large residuals)

This model will guide how you design your experiments. The choice of model
depends greatly on **what** it is you're going to study. 